blog: add march-monthly-report (#1879)
iresty/iresty.github.io: blog/en/blog/2025/03/31/march-monthly-report.md

---

> We have recently added some new features within Apache APISIX, including adding supports for `ai-prompt-guard`, `ai-rate-limiting`, and `ai-request-rewrite` plugins, and some new/enhanced features like adding JWT Audience Validator in `openid-connect` Plugin. For detailed information, please read the monthly report.
<!--truncate-->

## Introduction

From its inception, the Apache APISIX project has embraced the ethos of open-source community collaboration, propelling it into the ranks of the most active global open-source API gateway projects. The proverbial wisdom of 'teamwork makes the dream work' rings true in our way and is made possible by the collective effort of our community.

From March 1st to March 31, 14 contributors made 50 commits to Apache APISIX. We sincerely appreciate your contributions to Apache APISIX.

## Contributor Statistics

![Apache APISIX Contributors List](https://static.api7.ai/uploads/2025/03/31/fDYTi9Vu_march-contributor-list.webp)

![New Contributors List](https://static.api7.ai/uploads/2025/03/31/NB9qpu7Q_mar-new-contributors.webp)

## Good First Issue

> ### Issue #12098

Reviewer: can you write a desc

> Link：[https://github.com/apache/apisix/issues/12098](https://github.com/apache/apisix/issues/12098)

Reviewer: the text in `[ ]` better be a textual desc rather than the link

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Issue: https://github.com/apache/apisix/issues/12098
```

> Problem Description: In [PR #12029](https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12029), the configuration code for the plugin needs to be improved.

Author: Fixed the description @kayx23

## Feature Highlights

### New Plugins

> **1. [Support `ai-prompt-guard` Plugin](https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12008)(Contributor: [Revolyssup](https://github.com/Revolyssup))**

Reviewer: format suggestion: make these numbered bullet point `###` level title so one can skim over the TOC (on the right) and see what's new. This means you can remove `### New Plugins` and for h3 title say `Add xxx Plugin`.

But you can decide if you want to change the format.

**3. [Support `ai-request-rewrite` Plugin](https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12036)(Contributor: [LiteSun](https://github.com/LiteSun))**

The ai-request-rewrite plugin leverages predefined prompts and AI services to intelligently modify client requests, enabling AI-powered content transformation before forwarding to upstream services.

### New/Enhanced Features

**1. [Support Proxying OpenAI-Compatible LLMs](https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12004)(Contributor: [shreemaan-abhishek](https://github.com/shreemaan-abhishek))**

This PR introduces a new provider, `openai-compatible`, that can proxy requests to OpenAI-compatible LLMs.

**2. [Store JWT in the Request Context in `jwt-auth` Plugin](https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/11675)(Contributor: [mikyll](https://github.com/mikyll))**

The `jwt-auth` plugin now has a new parameter: `store_in_ctx`. When enabled (default is off), it stores the validated JWT object in the request context.

This feature is especially beneficial for custom plugins:

- When `hide_credential = true` removes the JWT from request attributes, store_in_ctx offers a secure alternative for token passing without exposure.

> - It prevents custom plugins from duplicating code to retrieve and parse JWT objects, as the `jwt-auth` plugin already handles these tasks.

Reviewer: > It prevents custom plugins from duplicating code to retrieve 

can't understand, please rephrase

Author: It prevents custom plugins from duplicated code, for example, retrieve and parse JWT objects.

Reviewer: "prevents custom plugins from duplicated code" makes no sense ah

Author: delete this reason?

**3. [Add JWT Audience Validator in `openid-connect` Plugin](https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/11987)(Contributor: [bzp2010](https://github.com/bzp2010))**

> Add JWT audience authentication to the `openid-connect` plugin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add JWT audience authentication to the `openid-connect` plugin to:
```

> - Ensures the claim exists; otherwise, rejects the request.

Reviewer: it is by default "false":

<img width="978" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1b55f242-e63c-49f6-9e2d-09be1e0c0147" />

So maybe rephrase it to "allow the configuration of ... to enforce validation of ..."

Author: How about: Allow the configuration of audience claim to enforce validation of JWT Audience Validator?

Reviewer: sounds good

> - Verifies the claim equals or contains the client_id per OIDC specs; otherwise, rejects the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Verifies the claim equals or contains the `client_id` per OIDC specs; otherwise, rejects the request.
```

---

> We have recently added some new features within Apache APISIX, including adding supports for `ai-prompt-guard`, `ai-rate-limiting`, and `ai-request-rewrite` plugins, and some new/enhanced features like adding JWT Audience Validator in `openid-connect` Plugin. For detailed information, please read the monthly report.
<!--truncate-->

## Introduction

From its inception, the Apache APISIX project has embraced the ethos of open-source community collaboration, propelling it into the ranks of the most active global open-source API gateway projects. The proverbial wisdom of 'teamwork makes the dream work' rings true in our way and is made possible by the collective effort of our community.

From March 1st to March 31, 14 contributors made 50 commits to Apache APISIX. We sincerely appreciate your contributions to Apache APISIX.

## Contributor Statistics

![Apache APISIX Contributors List](https://static.api7.ai/uploads/2025/03/31/fDYTi9Vu_march-contributor-list.webp)

![New Contributors List](https://static.api7.ai/uploads/2025/03/31/NB9qpu7Q_mar-new-contributors.webp)

## Good First Issue

> ### Issue #12098 Improve Configuration Code of `chaitin-waf` Plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Improve Schema of `chaitin-waf` Plugin
```

Link：[https://github.com/apache/apisix/issues/12098](https://github.com/apache/apisix/issues/12098)

> Issue Description: Consider the comments of [PR #12029](https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12029#discussion_r2018012041) for `chaitin-waf` plugin, the value "nil" of `enum` can be removed due to the default value is set to "nil".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider the comments of [PR #12029](https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12029#discussion_r2018012041) for `chaitin-waf` plugin. The value `nil` of `enum` can be removed since default value is already set to `nil`.
```

Contributor: [shreemaan-abhishek](https://github.com/shreemaan-abhishek)

The `ai-rate-limiting` plugin enforces token-based rate limiting for requests sent to LLM services. It helps manage API usage by controlling the number of tokens consumed within a specified time frame, ensuring fair resource allocation and preventing excessive load on the service. It is often used with `ai-proxy-multi` plugin.

### 3. Add `ai-request-rewrite` Plugin

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12036

Contributor: [LiteSun](https://github.com/LiteSun)

The `ai-request-rewrite` plugin leverages predefined prompts and AI services to intelligently modify client requests, enabling AI-powered content transformation before forwarding to upstream services.

### 4. Support Proxying OpenAI-Compatible LLMs

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12004

Contributor: [shreemaan-abhishek](https://github.com/shreemaan-abhishek)

This PR introduces a new provider, `openai-compatible`, that can proxy requests to OpenAI-compatible LLMs.

### 5. Store JWT in the Request Context in `jwt-auth` Plugin

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/11675

Contributor: [mikyll](https://github.com/mikyll)

> The `jwt-auth` plugin now has a new parameter: `store_in_ctx`. It allows the configuration of When enabled (default is off), it stores the validated JWT object in the request context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `jwt-auth` plugin now has a new parameter: `store_in_ctx`. It allows the configuration of when enabled (default is off), it stores the validated JWT object in the request context.
```

Reviewer: can u check if the default is "false"? or off?

This feature is especially beneficial for two reasons:

- The JWT can be removed from request attributes when `hide_credential = true`, this offers a secure alternative for token passing without exposure.

- It prevents custom plugins from duplicated code, for example, retrieve and parse JWT objects.

### 6. Add JWT Audience Validator in `openid-connect` Plugin

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/11987

Contributor: [bzp2010](https://github.com/bzp2010)

Add JWT audience authentication to the `openid-connect` plugin to:

- Allow the configuration of audience claim to enforce validation of JWT Audience Validator.

> - Asserts that it should be equal to or contain the `client_id` to comply with the OIDC specification requirements; otherwise, rejects the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Asserts that it should be equal to or contain the `client_id`  when the `client_id` is a string or an array respectively, to comply with the OIDC specification requirements; otherwise, rejects the request.
```

> - Allows customization of the claim.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allows customization of the claim name.
```

Directly implemented in plugin code since jwt-validators only supports local verification, not the Introspection API. Features are disabled by default for compatibility. Users can enable them as needed.

### 7. Set Default Value of `ssl_trusted_certificate` to `system`

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/11993

Contributor: [Revolyssup](https://github.com/Revolyssup)

When testing AI plugins, we found that `ssl_trusted_certificate` must be set to `system`; otherwise, APISIX reports "unable to get local issuer certificate" when accessing external AI services.

This PR:

- Moves schema validation into `read_yaml_conf` for consistency, with `local_conf` now just calling `read_yaml_conf` internally and adding caching.
- Ensures schema validation happens first when reading YAML files, setting the default trusted certificate value to `system` before overrides (including replacing `system` with certificate paths).
- Removes support for combining multiple certificates.

### 8. Add `valid_issuers` Field in `openid-connect` Plugin

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12002

Contributor: [Revolyssup](https://github.com/Revolyssup)

> Adds a field `valid_issuers` when JWKs is used to verify the issuer of the JWT. Whitelist the vetted issuers of the JWT. When not passed by the user, the issuer returned by the discovery endpoint will be used. If both are missing, the issuer will not be validated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adds a field `valid_issuers` when JWKs is used to verify the issuer of the JWT, which whitelists the vetted issuers of the JWT. When not passed by the user, the issuer returned by the discovery endpoint will be used. If both are missing, the issuer will not be validated.
```

### 9. Implement Rate-Limiting based on Fallback Strategy in `ai-proxy-multi` Plugin

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12047

Contributor: [shreemaan-abhishek](https://github.com/shreemaan-abhishek)

In a previous refactor PR, the fallback strategy was removed to accommodate the `ai-rate-limiting` plugin. This PR introduces a fallback strategy that fits well with the rate-limiting construction in the `ai-proxy-multi` plugin.

### 10. Support Embeddings API in `ai-proxy` Plugin

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12062

Contributor: [shreemaan-abhishek](https://github.com/shreemaan-abhishek)

> This PR adds support for proxying the embeddings API in the `ai-proxy` plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PR adds support for proxying to the embedding models in the `ai-proxy` and `ai-proxy-multi` Plugins.
```

a lot for changes for `ai-proxy` are common denominators - that also change for the multi plugin

### 11. Support `404` Response Code in `ip-restriction` Plugin

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12076

Contributor: [papdaniel](https://github.com/papdaniel)

> Support 404 response code to hide the route from blacklisted/not whitelisted sources.

Reviewer: > blacklisted/not whitelisted sources

why the "not whitelisted"?

### 3. Add `ai-request-rewrite` Plugin

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12036

Contributor: [LiteSun](https://github.com/LiteSun)

The `ai-request-rewrite` plugin leverages predefined prompts and AI services to intelligently modify client requests, enabling AI-powered content transformation before forwarding to upstream services.

### 4. Support Proxying OpenAI-Compatible LLMs

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12004

Contributor: [shreemaan-abhishek](https://github.com/shreemaan-abhishek)

This PR introduces a new provider, `openai-compatible`, that can proxy requests to OpenAI-compatible LLMs.

### 5. Store JWT in the Request Context in `jwt-auth` Plugin

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/11675

Contributor: [mikyll](https://github.com/mikyll)

The `jwt-auth` plugin now has a new parameter: `store_in_ctx`. It allows the configuration of when enabled (default is false), it stores the validated JWT object in the request context.

This feature is especially beneficial for two reasons:

- The JWT can be removed from request attributes when `hide_credential = true`, this offers a secure alternative for token passing without exposure.

> - It prevents custom plugins from duplicated code, for example, retrieve and parse JWT objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Do not require users to develop custom code to retrieve and parse JWT objects.
```
